docs/getting-started.md, before:

# Getting started guide

This getting started guide steps you through:

1. Installing and configuring Protect.js in a standalone project
2. Encrypting, searching, and decrypting data in a PostgreSQL database

> [!IMPORTANT] 
> **Prerequisites:** Before you start you need to have this software installed:
>
> - [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)
> - [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
> - [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) — see PostgreSQL's [documentation for installing](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)

## Table of contents

- [Step 0: Basic file structure](#step-0-basic-file-structure)
- [Step 1: Install Protect.js](#step-1-install-protectjs)
- [Step 2: Set up credentials](#step-2-set-up-credentials)
- [Step 3: Define your schema](#step-3-define-your-schema)
- [Step 4: Initialize the Protect client](#step-4-initialize-the-protect-client)
- [Step 5: Encrypt data](#step-5-encrypt-data)
- [Step 6: Decrypt data](#step-6-decrypt-data)
- [Step 7: Store encrypted data in a database](#step-7-store-encrypted-data-in-a-database)

## Step 0: Basic file structure

The following is the basic file structure of the standalone project for this getting started guide.
In the `src/protect/` directory, we have the table definition in `schema.ts` and the Protect.js client in `index.ts`.

```
📦 <project root>
 ├ 📂 src
 │   ├ 📂 protect
 │   │  ├ 📜 index.ts
 │   │  └ 📜 schema.ts
 │   └ 📜 index.ts
 ├ 📜 .env
 ├ 📜 cipherstash.toml
 ├ 📜 cipherstash.secret.toml
 ├ 📜 package.json
 └ 📜 tsconfig.json
```

If you're following this getting started guide with an existing app, skip to [the next step](#step-1-install-protectjs).

If you're following this getting started guide with a clean slate, create a basic structure by running:

```bash
mkdir -p protect-example/src/protect
cd protect-example
git init
npm init -y
```

## Step 1: Install Protect.js

Install the [`@cipherstash/protect` package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@cipherstash/protect) with your package manager of choice:

```bash
npm install @cipherstash/protect
# or
yarn add @cipherstash/protect
# or
pnpm add @cipherstash/protect
```

> [!TIP]
> [Bun](https://bun.sh/) is not currently supported due to a lack of [Node-API compatibility](https://github.com/oven-sh/bun/issues/158). Under the hood, Protect.js uses [CipherStash Client](#cipherstash-client) which is written in Rust and embedded using [Neon](https://github.com/neon-bindings/neon).

> [!NOTE] 
> **You need to opt out of bundling when using Protect.js.**
>
> Protect.js uses Node.js specific features and requires the use of the [native Node.js `require`](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#requireid).
>
> You need to opt out of bundling for tools like [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/configuration/externals/), [esbuild](https://webpack.js.org/configuration/externals/), or [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/config/next-config-js/serverExternalPackages).
>
> Read more about [building and bundling with Protect.js](#builds-and-bundling).

## Step 2: Set up credentials

If you haven't already, sign up for a [CipherStash account](https://cipherstash.com/signup).
Once you have an account, you will create a Workspace which is scoped to your application environment.

Follow the onboarding steps to get your first set of credentials required to use Protect.js.
By the end of the onboarding, you will have the following environment variables:

```bash
CS_WORKSPACE_CRN= # The workspace identifier
CS_CLIENT_ID= # The client identifier
CS_CLIENT_KEY= # The client key which is used as key material in combination with ZeroKMS
CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY= # The API key used for authenticating with the CipherStash API
```

Save these environment variables to a `.env` file in your project.

## Step 3: Define your schema

Protect.js uses a schema to define the tables and columns that you want to encrypt and decrypt.

To define your tables and columns, add the following to `src/protect/schema.ts`:

```ts
import { csTable, csColumn } from "@cipherstash/protect";

export const users = csTable("users", {
  email: csColumn("email"),
});

export const orders = csTable("orders", {
  address: csColumn("address"),
});
```

**Searchable encryption:**

If you want to search encrypted data in your PostgreSQL database, you must declare the indexes in schema in `src/protect/schema.ts`:

```ts
import { csTable, csColumn } from "@cipherstash/protect";

export const users = csTable("users", {
  email: csColumn("email").freeTextSearch().equality().orderAndRange(),
});

export const orders = csTable("orders", {
  address: csColumn("address"),
});
```

Read more about [defining your schema](./docs/reference/schema.md).

## Step 4: Initialize the Protect client

To import the `protect` function and initialize a client with your defined schema, add the following to `src/protect/index.ts`:

```ts
import { protect, type ProtectClientConfig } from "@cipherstash/protect";
import { users, orders } from "./schema";

const config: ProtectClientConfig = {
  schemas: [users, orders],
}

export const protectClient = await protect(config);
```

## Step 5: Encrypt data

Protect.js provides the `encrypt` function on `protectClient` to encrypt data.
`encrypt` takes a plaintext string, and an object with the table and column as parameters.

Start encrypting data by adding this to `src/index.ts`:

```typescript
import { users } from "./protect/schema";
import { protectClient } from "./protect";

const encryptResult = await protectClient.encrypt("secret@squirrel.example", {
  column: users.email,
  table: users,
});

if (encryptResult.failure) {
  // Handle the failure
  console.log(
    "error when encrypting:",
    encryptResult.failure.type,
    encryptResult.failure.message
  );
}

const ciphertext = encryptResult.data;
console.log("ciphertext:", ciphertext);
```

Run this with:

```bash
npx tsx src/index.ts
```

The `encrypt` function will return a `Result` object with either a `data` key, or a `failure` key.
The `encryptResult` will return one of the following:

```typescript
// Success
{
  data: {
    c: '\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\x61202020202020472aaf602219d48c4a...'
  }
}

// Failure
{
  failure: {
    type: 'EncryptionError',
    message: 'A message about the error'
  }
}
```

> [!TIP]
> Working with large payloads? Check out the [model operations with bulk cryptography functions](./reference/model-operations.md) docs.

## Step 6: Decrypt data

Use the `decrypt` function to decrypt data.
`decrypt` takes an encrypted data object as a parameter.

```typescript
import { protectClient } from "./protect";

const decryptResult = await protectClient.decrypt(ciphertext);

if (decryptResult.failure) {
  // Handle the failure
}

const plaintext = decryptResult.data;
```

The `decrypt` function returns a `Result` object with either a `data` key, or a `failure` key.
The `decryptResult` will return one of the following:

```typescript
// Success
{
  data: 'secret@squirrel.example'
}

// Failure
{
  failure: {
    type: 'DecryptionError',
    message: 'A message about the error'
  }
}
```

> [!TIP]
> Working with large payloads? Check out the [model operations with bulk cryptography functions](./reference/model-operations.md) docs.

## Step 7: Store encrypted data in a database

Encrypted data can be stored in any database that supports JSONB.

To store the encrypted data, specify the column type as `jsonb`:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  email jsonb NOT NULL,
);
```

---

### Didn't find what you wanted?

[Click here to let us know what was missing from our docs.](https://github.com/cipherstash/protectjs/issues/new?template=docs-feedback.yml&title=[Docs:]%20Feedback%20on%20getting-started.md)

Commit message:

docs: sync documentation with encryptQuery unified API implementation
Update all documentation to accurately reflect the encryptQuery unified API:

- Fix JSON containment examples to use `contains` property instead of
  deprecated `value` + `containmentType` pattern
- Add documentation for `JsonContainedByQueryTerm` with `containedBy` property
- Document all QueryTerm types and type guards with usage examples
- Add consistent Result/error handling to all encryptQuery examples
- Add `indexType` parameter to all scalar query examples
- Update deprecated functions section to show actual deprecated code
- Add `createQuerySearchTerms` deprecation notice
- Fix bulk encryption example bug (duplicate variable name)
- Add mutual exclusivity warning for `searchableJson()` index type
- Remove TODO comments from published documentation
- Add "Next steps" section to getting-started guide

Issues addressed from dual-verification review:
- C1-C5: Common issues found by both reviewers
- E1-E11: Validated exclusive issues from individual reviewers

docs/getting-started.md, after:

# Getting started guide

This getting started guide steps you through:

1. Installing and configuring Protect.js in a standalone project
2. Encrypting, searching, and decrypting data in a PostgreSQL database

> [!IMPORTANT] 
> **Prerequisites:** Before you start you need to have this software installed:
>
> - [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)
> - [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
> - [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) — see PostgreSQL's [documentation for installing](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)

## Table of contents

- [Step 0: Basic file structure](#step-0-basic-file-structure)
- [Step 1: Install Protect.js](#step-1-install-protectjs)
- [Step 2: Set up credentials](#step-2-set-up-credentials)
- [Step 3: Define your schema](#step-3-define-your-schema)
- [Step 4: Initialize the Protect client](#step-4-initialize-the-protect-client)
- [Step 5: Encrypt data](#step-5-encrypt-data)
- [Step 6: Decrypt data](#step-6-decrypt-data)
- [Step 7: Store encrypted data in a database](#step-7-store-encrypted-data-in-a-database)

## Step 0: Basic file structure

The following is the basic file structure of the standalone project for this getting started guide.
In the `src/protect/` directory, we have the table definition in `schema.ts` and the Protect.js client in `index.ts`.

```
📦 <project root>
 ├ 📂 src
 │   ├ 📂 protect
 │   │  ├ 📜 index.ts
 │   │  └ 📜 schema.ts
 │   └ 📜 index.ts
 ├ 📜 .env
 ├ 📜 cipherstash.toml
 ├ 📜 cipherstash.secret.toml
 ├ 📜 package.json
 └ 📜 tsconfig.json
```

If you're following this getting started guide with an existing app, skip to [the next step](#step-1-install-protectjs).

If you're following this getting started guide with a clean slate, create a basic structure by running:

```bash
mkdir -p protect-example/src/protect
cd protect-example
git init
npm init -y
```

## Step 1: Install Protect.js

Install the [`@cipherstash/protect` package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@cipherstash/protect) with your package manager of choice:

```bash
npm install @cipherstash/protect
# or
yarn add @cipherstash/protect
# or
pnpm add @cipherstash/protect
```

> [!TIP]
> [Bun](https://bun.sh/) is not currently supported due to a lack of [Node-API compatibility](https://github.com/oven-sh/bun/issues/158). Under the hood, Protect.js uses [CipherStash Client](#cipherstash-client) which is written in Rust and embedded using [Neon](https://github.com/neon-bindings/neon).

> [!NOTE] 
> **You need to opt out of bundling when using Protect.js.**
>
> Protect.js uses Node.js specific features and requires the use of the [native Node.js `require`](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#requireid).
>
> You need to opt out of bundling for tools like [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/configuration/externals/), [esbuild](https://webpack.js.org/configuration/externals/), or [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/config/next-config-js/serverExternalPackages).
>
> Read more about [building and bundling with Protect.js](#builds-and-bundling).

## Step 2: Set up credentials

If you haven't already, sign up for a [CipherStash account](https://cipherstash.com/signup).
Once you have an account, you will create a Workspace which is scoped to your application environment.

Follow the onboarding steps to get your first set of credentials required to use Protect.js.
By the end of the onboarding, you will have the following environment variables:

```bash
CS_WORKSPACE_CRN= # The workspace identifier
CS_CLIENT_ID= # The client identifier
CS_CLIENT_KEY= # The client key which is used as key material in combination with ZeroKMS
CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY= # The API key used for authenticating with the CipherStash API
```

Save these environment variables to a `.env` file in your project.

## Step 3: Define your schema

Protect.js uses a schema to define the tables and columns that you want to encrypt and decrypt.

To define your tables and columns, add the following to `src/protect/schema.ts`:

```ts
import { csTable, csColumn } from "@cipherstash/protect";

export const users = csTable("users", {
  email: csColumn("email"),
});

export const orders = csTable("orders", {
  address: csColumn("address"),
});
```

**Searchable encryption:**

If you want to search encrypted data in your PostgreSQL database, you must declare the indexes in schema in `src/protect/schema.ts`:

```ts
import { csTable, csColumn } from "@cipherstash/protect";

export const users = csTable("users", {
  email: csColumn("email").freeTextSearch().equality().orderAndRange(),
});

export const orders = csTable("orders", {
  address: csColumn("address"),
});
```

Read more about [defining your schema](./docs/reference/schema.md).

## Step 4: Initialize the Protect client

To import the `protect` function and initialize a client with your defined schema, add the following to `src/protect/index.ts`:

```ts
import { protect, type ProtectClientConfig } from "@cipherstash/protect";
import { users, orders } from "./schema";

const config: ProtectClientConfig = {
  schemas: [users, orders],
}

export const protectClient = await protect(config);
```

## Step 5: Encrypt data

Protect.js provides the `encrypt` function on `protectClient` to encrypt data.
`encrypt` takes a plaintext string, and an object with the table and column as parameters.

Start encrypting data by adding this to `src/index.ts`:

```typescript
import { users } from "./protect/schema";
import { protectClient } from "./protect";

const encryptResult = await protectClient.encrypt("secret@squirrel.example", {
  column: users.email,
  table: users,
});

if (encryptResult.failure) {
  // Handle the failure
  console.log(
    "error when encrypting:",
    encryptResult.failure.type,
    encryptResult.failure.message
  );
}

const ciphertext = encryptResult.data;
console.log("ciphertext:", ciphertext);
```

Run this with:

```bash
npx tsx src/index.ts
```

The `encrypt` function will return a `Result` object with either a `data` key, or a `failure` key.
The `encryptResult` will return one of the following:

```typescript
// Success
{
  data: {
    c: '\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\x61202020202020472aaf602219d48c4a...'
  }
}

// Failure
{
  failure: {
    type: 'EncryptionError',
    message: 'A message about the error'
  }
}
```

> [!TIP]
> Working with large payloads? Check out the [model operations with bulk cryptography functions](./reference/model-operations.md) docs.

## Step 6: Decrypt data

Use the `decrypt` function to decrypt data.
`decrypt` takes an encrypted data object as a parameter.

```typescript
import { protectClient } from "./protect";

const decryptResult = await protectClient.decrypt(ciphertext);

if (decryptResult.failure) {
  // Handle the failure
}

const plaintext = decryptResult.data;
```

The `decrypt` function returns a `Result` object with either a `data` key, or a `failure` key.
The `decryptResult` will return one of the following:

```typescript
// Success
{
  data: 'secret@squirrel.example'
}

// Failure
{
  failure: {
    type: 'DecryptionError',
    message: 'A message about the error'
  }
}
```

> [!TIP]
> Working with large payloads? Check out the [model operations with bulk cryptography functions](./reference/model-operations.md) docs.

## Step 7: Store encrypted data in a database

Encrypted data can be stored in any database that supports JSONB.

To store the encrypted data, specify the column type as `jsonb`:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  email jsonb NOT NULL,
);
```

## Next steps

Now that you have the basics working, explore these advanced features:

- **[Searchable Encryption](./reference/searchable-encryption-postgres.md)** - Learn how to search encrypted data using `encryptQuery()` with PostgreSQL and EQL
- **[Model Operations](./reference/model-operations.md)** - Encrypt and decrypt entire objects with bulk operations
- **[Schema Configuration](./reference/schema.md)** - Configure indexes for equality, free text search, range queries, and JSON search

---

### Didn't find what you wanted?

[Click here to let us know what was missing from our docs.](https://github.com/cipherstash/protectjs/issues/new?template=docs-feedback.yml&title=[Docs:]%20Feedback%20on%20getting-started.md)
