docs/reference/configuration.md, before:

# Protect.js configuration

Protect.js is configured with [toml](https://toml.io/en/) files or environment variables, and is used to initialize the client when Protect.js is initialized.

Environment variables will take precedence over configuration files and it's recommented to use them for sensitive values.

## Table of contents

- [cipherstash.toml](#cipherstashtoml)
  - [Specification](#specification)
    - [`[encrypt]` section](#encrypt-section)
    - [`[auth]` section](#auth-section)
- [cipherstash.secret.toml](#cipherstashsecrettoml)
- [Environment variables](#environment-variables)
- [Deploying to production](#deploying-to-production)
  - [Region configuration](#region-configuration)
  - [File system write permissions](#file-system-write-permissions)

## cipherstash.toml

The `cipherstash.toml` file is the primary (non-sensitive) configuration file.
It stores essential identifiers, like `client_id` and `workspace_id`, but **must not** contain **sensitive secrets** (e.g., `client_key`, `access_key`).
Those sensitive values should be placed in either: 

- The `cipherstash.secret.toml` file, or
- Environment variables (e.g., `CS_CLIENT_KEY`).

The `cipherstash.toml` must be stored in the root directory of your project.

### Specification

The minimal `cipherstash.toml` file:

```toml
# cipherstash.toml

[encrypt]
client_id = "your-client-id"

[auth]
workspace_id = "your-workspace-id"
```

#### `[encrypt]` section

- `client_id` (**required**): A UUID that identifies the client or project.  
- `default_keyset_id` (optional): A UUID referencing the default keyset (used if you have more than one keyset).  
- `client_key` (**not allowed**): This is explicitly disallowed and will be rejected at runtime.
The client key must be stored in `cipherstash.secret.toml` or in an environment variable `CS_CLIENT_KEY`.

#### `[auth]` section

- `workspace_id` (**required**): A base-32 encoded 10-byte unique identifier.
- `access_key` (**not allowed**): This is explicitly disallowed and will be rejected at runtime.
The access key must be stored in `cipherstash.secret.toml` or in an environment variable `CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY`.

## cipherstash.secret.toml

**`cipherstash.secret.toml`** is used to store **sensitive** CipherStash credentials that **must not** appear in `cipherstash.toml`.

The `cipherstash.toml` must be stored in the root directory of your project.

### Specification

The minimal `cipherstash.secret.toml` file:

```toml
# cipherstash.secret.toml

[encrypt]
client_key = "your-client-key"

[auth]
access_key = "your-access-key"
```

#### `[encrypt]` section

- `client_key` (**required**): The client key, typically a hex-encoded string generated by CipherStash.
This is critical for encrypting/decrypting data.

#### `[auth]` section

- `access_key` (**required**): The access key which is used to authenticate and authorize against CipherStash services.

## Environment variables

You can also use environment variables to configure Protect.js.
The following environment variables are supported:

|      Variable name     |                           Description                           | Required |                    Default                   |
|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|:--------------------------------------------:|
| `CS_CLIENT_ID`         | The client ID for your CipherStash account.                     | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CLIENT_KEY`        | The client key for your CipherStash account.                    | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_WORKSPACE_ID`      | The workspace ID for your CipherStash account.                  | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY` | The access key for your CipherStash account.                    | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_ZEROKMS_HOST`      | The host for the ZeroKMS server.                                | No       | `https://ap-southeast-2.aws.viturhosted.net` |
| `CS_CONFIG_PATH`       | A temporary path to store the CipherStash client configuration. | No       | `/home/{username}/.cipherstash`              |

## Deploying to production

> [!TIP]
> There are some configuration details you should take note of when deploying `@cipherstash/protect` in your production examples.

### Region configuration

If you've created a Workspace in a region other than `ap-southeast-2`, you will need to set the `CS_ZEROKMS_HOST` environment variable to the appropriate region. 

For example, if you are using ZeroKMS in the `eu-central-1` region, you need to set the `CS_ZEROKMS_HOST` variable to `https://eu-central-1.aws.viturhosted.net`. 
This is a known usability issue that will be addressed.

### File system write permissions

In most hosting environments, the `CS_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable will need to be set to a path that the user running the application has permission to write to.

Setting `CS_CONFIG_PATH` to `/tmp/.cipherstash` will work in most cases, and has been tested on [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), and [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/).

---

### Didn't find what you wanted?

[Click here to let us know what was missing from our docs.](https://github.com/cipherstash/protectjs/issues/new?template=docs-feedback.yml&title=[Docs:]%20Feedback%20on%configuration.md)

Commit message:

feat(protect): implement protect config object

docs/reference/configuration.md, after:

# Protect.js configuration

Protect.js is configured with [toml](https://toml.io/en/) files or environment variables, and is used to initialize the client when Protect.js is initialized.

Environment variables will take precedence over configuration files and it's recommented to use them for sensitive values.

## Table of contents

- [cipherstash.toml](#cipherstashtoml)
  - [Specification](#specification)
    - [`[encrypt]` section](#encrypt-section)
    - [`[auth]` section](#auth-section)
- [cipherstash.secret.toml](#cipherstashsecrettoml)
- [Environment variables](#environment-variables)
- [Configuring the Protect client directly](#configuring-the-protect-client-directly)
- [Deploying to production](#deploying-to-production)
  - [Region configuration](#region-configuration)
  - [File system write permissions](#file-system-write-permissions)

## cipherstash.toml

The `cipherstash.toml` file is the primary (non-sensitive) configuration file.
It stores essential identifiers, like `client_id` and `workspace_id`, but **must not** contain **sensitive secrets** (e.g., `client_key`, `access_key`).
Those sensitive values should be placed in either: 

- The `cipherstash.secret.toml` file, or
- Environment variables (e.g., `CS_CLIENT_KEY`).

The `cipherstash.toml` must be stored in the root directory of your project.

### Specification

The minimal `cipherstash.toml` file:

```toml
# cipherstash.toml

[encrypt]
client_id = "your-client-id"

[auth]
workspace_crn = "your-workspace-crn"
```

#### `[encrypt]` section

- `client_id` (**required**): A UUID that identifies the client or project.  
- `default_keyset_id` (optional): A UUID referencing the default keyset (used if you have more than one keyset).  
- `client_key` (**not allowed**): This is explicitly disallowed and will be rejected at runtime.
The client key must be stored in `cipherstash.secret.toml` or in an environment variable `CS_CLIENT_KEY`.

#### `[auth]` section

- `workspace_crn` (**required**): The workspace CRN for your CipherStash account.
- `access_key` (**not allowed**): This is explicitly disallowed and will be rejected at runtime.
The access key must be stored in `cipherstash.secret.toml` or in an environment variable `CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY`.

## cipherstash.secret.toml

**`cipherstash.secret.toml`** is used to store **sensitive** CipherStash credentials that **must not** appear in `cipherstash.toml`.

The `cipherstash.toml` must be stored in the root directory of your project.

### Specification

The minimal `cipherstash.secret.toml` file:

```toml
# cipherstash.secret.toml

[encrypt]
client_key = "your-client-key"

[auth]
access_key = "your-access-key"
```

#### `[encrypt]` section

- `client_key` (**required**): The client key, typically a hex-encoded string generated by CipherStash.
This is critical for encrypting/decrypting data.

#### `[auth]` section

- `access_key` (**required**): The access key which is used to authenticate and authorize against CipherStash services.

## Environment variables

You can also use environment variables to configure Protect.js.
The following environment variables are supported:

|      Variable name     |                           Description                           | Required |                    Default                   |
|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|:--------------------------------------------:|
| `CS_CLIENT_ID`         | The client ID for your CipherStash account.                     | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CLIENT_KEY`        | The client key for your CipherStash account.                    | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_WORKSPACE_CRN`     | The workspace CRN for your CipherStash account.                 | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY` | The access key for your CipherStash account.                    | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CONFIG_PATH`       | A temporary path to store the CipherStash client configuration. | No       | `/home/{username}/.cipherstash`              |

## Configuring the Protect client directly

You can also configure the Protect client directly by passing a `ProtectClientConfig` object to the `protect` function during initialization.
This is useful if you want to configure the Protect client specific to your application.
An exmaple of this might be if you want to use a secret manager to store your client key and access key rather than relying on environment variables or configuration files.

```ts
import { protect, type ProtectClientConfig } from "@cipherstash/protect";

const config: ProtectClientConfig = {
  schemas: [users, orders],
  workspaceCrn: "your-workspace-crn",
  accessKey: "your-access-key",
  clientId: "your-client-id",
  clientKey: "your-client-key",
}

const protectClient = await protect(config);
```

## Deploying to production

> [!TIP]
> There are some configuration details you should take note of when deploying `@cipherstash/protect` in your production examples.

### File system write permissions

In most hosting environments, the `CS_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable will need to be set to a path that the user running the application has permission to write to.

Setting `CS_CONFIG_PATH` to `/tmp/.cipherstash` will work in most cases, and has been tested on [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), and [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/).

---

### Didn't find what you wanted?

[Click here to let us know what was missing from our docs.](https://github.com/cipherstash/protectjs/issues/new?template=docs-feedback.yml&title=[Docs:]%20Feedback%20on%configuration.md)
