# Stash Encryption configuration

Stash Encryption is configured with [toml](https://toml.io/en/) files or environment variables, and is used to initialize the client when Stash Encryption is initialized.

Environment variables will take precedence over configuration files and it's recommented to use them for sensitive values.

## Table of contents

- [cipherstash.toml](#cipherstashtoml)
  - [Specification](#specification)
    - [`[encrypt]` section](#encrypt-section)
    - [`[auth]` section](#auth-section)
- [cipherstash.secret.toml](#cipherstashsecrettoml)
- [Environment variables](#environment-variables)
- [Configuring the Encryption client directly](#configuring-the-encryption-client-directly)
- [Deploying to production](#deploying-to-production)
  - [Region configuration](#region-configuration)
  - [File system write permissions](#file-system-write-permissions)

## cipherstash.toml

The `cipherstash.toml` file is the primary (non-sensitive) configuration file.
It stores essential identifiers, like `client_id` and `workspace_id`, but **must not** contain **sensitive secrets** (e.g., `client_key`, `access_key`).
Those sensitive values should be placed in either: 

- The `cipherstash.secret.toml` file, or
- Environment variables (e.g., `CS_CLIENT_KEY`).

The `cipherstash.toml` must be stored in the root directory of your project.

### Specification

The minimal `cipherstash.toml` file:

```toml
# cipherstash.toml

[encrypt]
client_id = "your-client-id"

[auth]
workspace_crn = "your-workspace-crn"
```

#### `[encrypt]` section

- `client_id` (**required**): A UUID that identifies the client or project.  
- `default_keyset_id` (optional): A UUID referencing the default keyset (used if you have more than one keyset).  
- `client_key` (**not allowed**): This is explicitly disallowed and will be rejected at runtime.
The client key must be stored in `cipherstash.secret.toml` or in an environment variable `CS_CLIENT_KEY`.

#### `[auth]` section

- `workspace_crn` (**required**): The workspace CRN for your CipherStash account.
- `access_key` (**not allowed**): This is explicitly disallowed and will be rejected at runtime.
The access key must be stored in `cipherstash.secret.toml` or in an environment variable `CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY`.

## cipherstash.secret.toml

**`cipherstash.secret.toml`** is used to store **sensitive** CipherStash credentials that **must not** appear in `cipherstash.toml`.

The `cipherstash.toml` must be stored in the root directory of your project.

### Specification

The minimal `cipherstash.secret.toml` file:

```toml
# cipherstash.secret.toml

[encrypt]
client_key = "your-client-key"

[auth]
access_key = "your-access-key"
```

#### `[encrypt]` section

- `client_key` (**required**): The client key, typically a hex-encoded string generated by CipherStash.
This is critical for encrypting/decrypting data.

#### `[auth]` section

- `access_key` (**required**): The access key which is used to authenticate and authorize against CipherStash services.

## Environment variables

You can also use environment variables to configure Stash Encryption.
The following environment variables are supported:

|      Variable name     |                           Description                           | Required |                    Default                   |
|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------------------:|:--------:|:--------------------------------------------:|
| `CS_CLIENT_ID`         | The client ID for your CipherStash account.                     | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CLIENT_KEY`        | The client key for your CipherStash account.                    | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_WORKSPACE_CRN`     | The workspace CRN for your CipherStash account.                 | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CLIENT_ACCESS_KEY` | The access key for your CipherStash account.                    | Yes      |                                              |
| `CS_CONFIG_PATH`       | A temporary path to store the CipherStash client configuration. | No       | `/home/{username}/.cipherstash`              |

## Configuring the Encryption client directly

You can also configure the Encryption client directly by passing an `EncryptionClientConfig` object to the `Encryption` function during initialization.
This is useful if you want to configure the Encryption client specific to your application.
An exmaple of this might be if you want to use a secret manager to store your client key and access key rather than relying on environment variables or configuration files.

```ts
import { Encryption, type EncryptionClientConfig } from "@cipherstash/stack";

const config: EncryptionClientConfig = {
  schemas: [users, orders],
  workspaceCrn: "your-workspace-crn",
  accessKey: "your-access-key",
  clientId: "your-client-id",
  clientKey: "your-client-key",
}

const encryptionClient = await Encryption(config);
```

## Deploying to production

> [!TIP]
> There are some configuration details you should take note of when deploying `@cipherstash/stack` in your production examples.

### File system write permissions

In most hosting environments, the `CS_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable will need to be set to a path that the user running the application has permission to write to.

Setting `CS_CONFIG_PATH` to `/tmp/.cipherstash` will work in most cases, and has been tested on [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), and [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/).

---

### Didn't find what you wanted?

[Click here to let us know what was missing from our docs.](https://github.com/cipherstash/protectjs/issues/new?template=docs-feedback.yml&title=[Docs:]%20Feedback%20on%configuration.md)
